docs: add GPIO controller page (#442)
aica-technology/api: docs/docs/concepts/building-blocks/controllers/gpio.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
title: GPIO
---

> # General Purpose Input/Output (GPIO) Controllers

Author: I would perhaps still keep that there (as in, I did this on purpose), but no strong opinion. It just seems good to reiterate those are controllers, in case we link from another page

**General Purpose Input/Output (GPIO) Controllers** provide a standardized way to interact with **digital I/O signals**
exposed by a robot or device. These signals are commonly used to control or monitor external hardware such as grippers,
sensors, indicators, safety devices, or auxiliary tooling.

> GPIO controllers operate on discrete input and output signals, providing dedicated handling of analog or digital I/Os.

Author: also leftover from the digital

This specialization differentiates them from motion-oriented controllers and keeps GPIO interaction simple,
deterministic, and easy to integrate into higher-level application logic.

---

## Overview

GPIO controllers enable applications to:

- **Read GPIO state** (e.g., sensor feedback, limit switches)
- **Command GPIO outputs** (e.g., enable a tool, toggle a relay)
- **Interact with external devices** with low latency and predictable behavior

> Within the AICA framework, GPIO functionality can be handled by controllers that also perform motion control. In

Author: Trying to say that we have controllers that are doing joint control but also GPIO handling. I'll see how to rephrase if it's not clear

addition, AICA provides **generic GPIO-only controllers** for cases where a I/O needs to be managed independently, such
as external devices or sensors without associated motion.

These generic controllers are specialized for a single responsibility:

- **Broadcasting controllers** expose states to the rest of the system
- **Output controllers** command values on the hardware

---

## GPIOs in robot models

In ROS 2, GPIOs are declared in the robot's **URDF** using dedicated GPIO tags. These tags define:

> - The GPIO name and direction (input or output)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The GPIO name and direction (state or command)
```
since this is the actual name in the URDF?

**analog (non-binary)** I/O within the context of a controller. This specialization differentiates them from
motion-oriented controllers and keeps GPIO interaction simple, deterministic, and easy to integrate into higher-level
application logic.

GPIO controllers enable applications to:

- **Read GPIO state** (e.g., sensor feedback, limit switches)
- **Command GPIO outputs** (e.g., enable a tool, toggle a relay)
- **Interact with external devices** with low latency and predictable behavior

AICA provides **generic GPIO controllers** that are specialized for a single responsibility:

- **Broadcasting controllers** expose GPIO state to the AICA application
- **Output controllers** command GPIO values on the hardware

## GPIOs in robot models

In ROS 2, GPIOs are declared in the robot’s **URDF** using dedicated GPIO tags. These tags define:

- The GPIO name and direction (state or command)
- Its association with a robot or device
- The command or state interface used to access it

By relying on the robot description, GPIO controllers can automatically discover available I/O signals and expose them
consistently, without hard-coded assumptions about the underlying hardware.

:::info

> Some specialized controllers (for example, controllers for specific robot arms) may combine motion control and I/O

Reviewer: I agree with the first phrase, not so much with the second though. We don't really have descriptions written well enough that elaborate on such details..
